Joe Biden has been projected to reach the 270 electoral college votes needed to beat Donald Trump in the race to the White House. What happens now?

The former vice-president does not get to move his furniture into 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue straight away - there are a few things that need to happen first.

It's usually a smooth process, but there are extra complications this time due to probable legal challenges to the election. When does Joe Biden become president?
First the votes need to be certified in each of the states. That's usually a formality and happens in the next few weeks.

It's written in the US Constitution that the new term of office begins on 20 January at noon.

It happens at a ceremony called the inauguration which takes place in the capital, Washington DC. The new president and vice-president take an oath of office administered by the Supreme Court chief justice.

So expect to see Joe Biden and Kamala Harris inaugurated on 20 January 2021. What is the presidential transition?
This is the period between the election result and the start of the new presidential term on 20 January.

The incoming president assembles a group called a transition team who prepare to assume power immediately after inauguration - and the Biden team has already set up a transition website.

They will pick people to serve in the cabinet, discuss policy priorities and prepare to govern. Members of the team will go into the federal agencies to get briefed on things like looming deadlines, budgets and which career staff do what.

They will gather all that intelligence for the incoming staff and still make themselves available to help after inauguration. Some of them may stay on to serve.

In 2016, President Barack Obama met his successor Donald Trump and their Oval Office photos conveyed how little warmth there was - and remains - between them. What has Biden done so far?
Joe Biden has spent months putting together his transition team and raising cash to fund it.

But the General Services Administration, which is tasked with formally recognising the president-elect, and providing the funds and access to federal agencies that his team needs, has so far held off on acknowledging Mr Biden's victory.

Its administrator, Emily Murphy, a Trump appointee, said no "ascertainment" on an election winner had yet been made.

The Biden team is reportedly preparing for legal action if the Trump administration continues to stall the handover. What words will we hear a lot of?
President-elect: When a candidate wins the election but has yet to be sworn in as the new president on 20 January, this is what they are called.

Cabinet: Joe Biden will soon start announcing who he wants in his cabinet, which is the top team at the highest level of government. It includes heads of all the key departments and agencies.

Confirmation hearing: Many of the top government posts filled by the president require approval from the Senate. The people picked by Mr Biden are interviewed by Senate committees in a hearing, followed by a vote to approve or reject.

Celtic: As president-elect, Mr Biden gets increased protection from the Secret Service and his codename is Celtic. These names are chosen by the candidate. Mr Trump was Mogul and Kamala Harris has reportedly picked Pioneer. What about legal challenges?
The Trump campaign has promised lawsuits in several states where Mr Biden has won or is narrowly ahead. Mr Trump has alleged fraud but offered no evidence.

What legal challenges is Trump planning?
Efforts to throw out some postal votes would begin in state courts but could end up in the Supreme Court. However, legal experts have suggested the lawsuits are unlikely to succeed in altering the results.

There are also expected to be recounts in some states, requested by the Trump campaign, but they are not expected to change the outcome. What if Trump doesn't concede?
By North America reporter Anthony Zurcher

Donald Trump has previously said he will contest the results. If his efforts to do so are unsuccessful, the pressure on him to publicly admit defeat will mount. But does he have to?

The concession phone call from a losing candidate to the victor is a respected tradition of American politics. It is by no means obligatory, however.

In 2018, for instance, Democratic governor candidate Stacey Abrams claimed voter fraud and intimidation and never conceded to Brian Kemp, her Republican opponent.

That's never happened in a modern presidential race, however. But as in Georgia, as long as election results are legally processed and certified, the machinery of government will grind on, regardless of what Mr Trump may do.

While Mr Trump doesn't have to concede, or even put on a good face and attend Mr Biden's inauguration, he does have some legal obligations. He must authorise his administration to make the logistical preparations for Biden's team to take over.

Donald Trump ascended to the presidency as an unconventional candidate unafraid to break long-established norms and traditions. If he so desires, he could exit the office that way, as well.